[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well greetings everyone welcome
to church history and theology today we
look into the story of a city that is
more Central than I would say the vast
majority of Christians realize as you
open the book of Acts and come AC across
the name uh Antioch you may be forgiven
to think of it as a small town or as a a
city perhaps uh somewhere on the
outskirts that was maybe just a little
bit closer to the Ocean than Jerusalem
and um and then realize that there were
some issues that happened there and some
of the uh some of the uh fascinating
aspects uh of the church's earliest
history happening there but you will be
for given to not realize that you're
actually dealing with a city that for
the first 500 years of the church played
one of the most Central roles uh in its
theological development its thought and
its biblical interpretation and so today
as we look into Antioch the Rome of the
East we will U be able to pull apart
this city the structure of it the
founding of it its role what it did why
it was so Central and then uh some of
the theological issues that it gets into
um as the years go
on so let's start with the city itself
Antioch you know if you were like me you
had no idea where Antioch was right you
have this idea that Antioch is somehow
connected to Jerusalem maybe it's not
that far away um it is not close to
Jerusalem at all it is not in Israel it
is actually in Syria North of Israel
several hundred miles
and uh as far as Alexandria Egypt is is
about the same distance that Antioch is
from Jerusalem and so you were not
talking about something that is a short
trip you are talking about something
that is a considerable distance and and
something to uh something to uh really
keep in mind when you're reading the uh
the book of Acts because sometimes the
distances in there become fairly
squinched together as you read uh same
with the years uh the same thing happens
with distances when you say that you
know he set out from from Jerusalem and
then came to Antioch that sounds like
it's as close as Samaria but it is
actually considerably farther away um
but Antioch for all of its distance
there plays such a pivotal role early on
in the church's life uh it is in fact in
Antioch where um where Christians are
first given the name that we still are
called by and that is Christian uh we
were not given uh any other term we were
originally followers of the way uh and
also disciples and then Christian is the
name that stuck and a lot of that has to
do with how massive of a city Antioch
actually was in the first century um
Antioch itself had been founded after
the uh the death of Alexander the Great
by one of the four kingdoms uh that set
up uh right there on the oronas river
this new type of City uh this would be
after Alexander the Great uh in the in
the 4th Century BC died um one of his
generals became the leader of the cusd
Empire uh this would be AB named after
him uh salus himself and he founded this
city called Antioch now at the time the
city itself was limited to essentially
an island in the middle of the of the
rones river that was uh both
um protected by its own natural moving
moat that's fantastic uh but also it is
uh Central for trade it is central for
defense uh it is a unique Place uh that
has a source of fresh water it has
plenty of food it is the The Crossings
of both east and west and north and
south and it becomes enormously uh
pivotal in that area of the world uh
until of course and and then expanded
since then the incoming of the Roman
Empire um as Antioch grew for several
hundred years before the Christians uh
came into the world um Antioch was the
capital of the sald Empire and it became
one of the most enormous and influential
cities in all of the Ancient World um
many many people from all over the world
would live inside Antioch there was even
a whole section of the city that was
Jewish
and you can even see evidences of this
show up in the book of Acts and the uh
presence of Peter sitting with the Jews
versus his time with the Gentiles uh you
had people that were Macedonian Syrian
Greek Roman you had all sorts of people
living here um the the size of the city
by the time the first century uh was
anywhere from a quarter to up to half a
million people and you got to understand
for for a city that really did not exist
in ancient ancient Antiquity this is
incredible I mean this was really the
effect of
heniz and the shrinking of the world
after Alexander the Great and the four
kingdoms and then Rome comes in and it
just lends fuel to the fire of these
places that were founded uh very um very
specifically for their trade potential
and their defensive abilities um and so
Antioch becomes the third largest city
in all of the Roman
Empire right it is only after Rome and
Alexandria Egypt in size and so it is
not only a trade Hub nor is it only a a
place for theological learning which is
what it will become here very shortly um
but it is also one of these places that
is politically just a
Powerhouse uh it is it has amazing
military power it has incredible culture
it has an amazing structure to it uh and
it is one of those cities that is is
overlooked pretty quick in church
history really until we come into the
discussions of the christology uh
controversies of the fourth and fth
centuries but set it up from here on out
we realize that Christianity in Antioch
is
Central Christianity of course arrives
in Antioch soon after the pers utions
that break out in Jerusalem um but even
before that you have people that were
visiting in Jerusalem Jews from all
sorts of different countries uh that
were there for Pentecost and actually uh
actually observed the disciples and
heard the preaching of Peter in the very
first day of the New Testament Church
and returned back to these cities and
were aware of these things but as far as
for its role in the book of Acts is
concerned it's it's plain enough to see
uh so we're not going to walk through
all of that but suffice it to say that
the role of Antioch uh played as
reception of Christians after the
persecution broke out in Israel against
Christians but then it also played as a
place where the gospel was sent forth
throughout the world in fact the vast
majority of the missionary Journeys that
took place in the early church were sent
out from Antioch not
Jerusalem it becomes launching point for
Paul and barnabas' missionary Journeys
and uh and for several other things even
Peter coming there tradition holds that
he played a role as Bishop there that's
something we'll take on a little bit
later on um but there really is
something that we we address here as far
as uh the role of of the Apostles and
the early church and Antioch and all
sorts of other things at this point in
history Antioch would have been the main
center of the church right Jerusalem
plays an undoubtedly theological
grandfather of the church there's no
doubting about that but Antioch really
takes all of that to the next level as
far as the Gentile church is concerned
at least in the first and 2 Century um
you have significant prominent leaders
that are involved in Antioch prominent
leaders um many that you will know the
name of Peter of course Paul is uh
largely involved there uh Barnabas is
involved there uh there's several others
that are involved there that uh even
Matthew is is argued by some as having
uh written his gospel specifically in
Antioch and to uh antien Christians uh
Jewish anti Christians um debatable
points all of these but the reality is
that in the in the city itself most of
the prominence will be coming from the
fact that it was simply a center of
travel and of knowledge and you have
some of the more prominent leaders early
on in Church's history um one of the
most well-known is the um uh The elusive
figure of ignacius of Antioch um an
early martyr uh who was a church leader
in the church in Antioch um and we have
several of his letters purported to have
come from him several that we know did
several that we know didn't um we'll get
into that we're going to have a couple
nights on Ignatius himself um but this
this whole concept of um you know a
preser from uh Antioch being put to
death in the early 100s um that should
that should not settle on you as
something small Antioch is not another
city like Ephesus or myus or pergamum uh
Antioch is
massive Antioch is
uh as far as the Roman Empire is
concerned at this time uh one of the one
of the most Central cities in all of its
Empire it is not Minor by any stretch of
the imagination and so one of the
leaders from that City it would have
been very prominent uh that he is put to
death and um and so go the
stories well over the
time Antioch gets quite a reputation for
itself
um a lot of that is from influence but
even a lot of it before that is from its
own geographical place the geological
realities of uh Antioch was that it
suffered earthquakes on the regular um
there were earthquakes almost as well I
mean obviously even without the city
there there were earthquakes but people
started paying attention to them after
they built there earthquakes in the 2
and the 1 centuries BC uh and also in
the 1 and 2 centuries ad um you even had
a really uh famous one that took place
when Emperor Tran was visiting Antioch
and actually staying there he had a home
there um and a massive earthquake uh
struck there and it killed tens of
thousands of people uh he himself
Emperor trajan was uh injured during
that uh earthquake in
115 um but again the city continued to
be rebuilt uh had to and so that's kind
of one of the the benefits I suppose if
you're a trade Hub and very important to
the Empire and earthquakes keep
happening well guess what you just keep
getting new buildings and that's uh
that's a pretty interesting uh aspect to
it and so as far as that's concerned um
quite nice but it does challenge the
infrastructure right and
so here's kind of the thing if you stay
on then everything's fine if the Roman
Empire continues on it can keep on uh
subsidizing your rebuilding efforts and
uh if that continues on but the problem
is that Rome didn't continue on and had
to deal with civil wars uh in the in the
uh 3rd Century the latter half of the 3D
century and so Antioch itself as a city
had more and more and more
infrastructure issues over time this led
to difficulties as a city but its role
in the church and its influence in
theology is UN questionably still
present in the fourth and fifth and
sixth
century and it does Wayne away after
that but we'll get into why that is here
uh this shows up in the Council of NAA
now the Council of NAA if you're taking
any church history class and I I beat
this into us back in season 1 is if
there's not going to be any other date
that you memorize in church history it
best be the Council of NAA that is 325
ad um Not only was the nyine Creed at
least the first version of it written
during that time but also the Cannons of
NAA were written at that time as well
and if you want to know how Central uh
the the influence of uh of Antioch is
you can go read Canon 6 which gives the
uh the jurisdiction yes all political
all legal uh the jurisdiction of Syria
cissa and mes Amia to Antioch and it
gives uh all of the areas surrounding
Egypt to Alexandria and then everywhere
else up in uh Europe it gives to Rome
and so these three centers of the church
in the early 300s in the early 4th
Century Rome Alexandria and Antioch that
is the role that all of them play now
Rome why Rome well Rome because Rome's
the capital everything you know all
roads lead there there Alexandria why
there Alexandria by the time of the 300s
had become a theological Powerhouse of
its own in the first century it wasn't
so there wasn't a church there uh of any
stretch that we would call an
influential church that comes later on
uh with with people like origin um and
uh and Clement and several others that
we'll talk about going forward but
Antioch from the very earliest days from
the presence of Peter and Paul there um
which by the way simply mention in
passing if uh Peter's uh bishopi does
pass to anyone if such a thing is true
uh one of the questions is why not
Antioch by all tradition um we actually
have more proof that he was the bishop
of Antioch than we do that uh he was the
bishop of Rome but I'll just leave that
as a side note if you want to go and
read about that um the the centers of
the church uh being argued by NAA to be
Rome Antioch and Alexandria show us how
Central the theological role and
influence of Antioch still is in the 4th
Century in fact in the late 4th Century
we start to see the development of
something that is really impressive and
that is the lasting effect of the antien
school now if you've only had a cursory
introduction to church history you would
be um
forgiven again if you weren't familiar
with this the antien school uh was
largely um uh emerges out of um the
teaching and the habits uh of of several
men who held to the literal historical
interpretation of scripture okay um so
if you for instance come to uh the
scriptures themselves you're not going
to be looking for uh necessarily just
typological or or more importantly
you're not looking for allegorical
methods of interpretation right and so
um people like origin who really
centered himself on the allegorical
interpretation of scripture um and some
of these places you can go read uh some
of those uh allegorical interpretations
of scripture and see how broad those uh
interpretations can be and how
non-specific
and yet bizarrely specific all at the
same time in Antioch that was nearly
completely rejected uh figures like
diodora of Tarsus uh uh towards the
towards the second half of the 4th
Century really emerge out uh as leading
figures in the in taien school and this
really contrasts largely with as I said
the allegorical method of interpretation
which was if you're going to be taking
notes uh centered in the alexandrian
school now you're going to see this back
and forth throughout history a lot uh
especially as we are doing a much more
um devoted effort in this walkthrough of
church history where we spend nearly a
year in each Century you are going to
get your fill of the of the problems
between Alexandria Egypt and Antioch
Syria these two places are going to be
the hot beds of controversy going back
and forth back and forth for
centuries and unless you think I am
exaggerating in fact over um over half
of the issues that are being dealt with
in the um in the uh in the councils the
supposed ecumenical councils of the
church uh are dealing with issues and
disagreements between these two cities
so Antioch and Alexandria are Center uh
stage left and Center Stage right in
almost every controversy after uh the
Aryan
controversy and there was actually a
little bit of play with Aryan stuff as
well but that's that's another
discussion in all of this you have
several figures that arise out of the
entia Keen School uh people like uh
Theodor of mopsuestia mestia is right
next to Antioch um who was actually a
student of diodora of Tarsus again
Tarsus nearby um uh very influential
very much in in advocating for the dite
christology
if if you're not interested in all of
the christological terms and things like
this I do not blame you I will just
simply say that on the front end diyite
christology and monopis christology
these types of terminologies are really
what made me hate church history very
early on until I just realized that're
they're literally just talking about
whether uh Christ had two Natures or one
nature we really honestly should leave
off some of these other languages when
discussing this stuff because it really
just confuses the whole thing um in
Antioch for instance uh there was a much
of an advocation of the uh the diyite
christology the idea that Christ had two
Natures uh a human and a divine nature
right and this comes out of a Lal a
literal approach to scripture uh Theodor
of mopsuestia is one of those who uh
would push for this um and then uh but
over in Alexandria for instance you had
the other side that was the monopis
christology this idea that the Christ
had one nature it was the christological
nature uh and there's
a a lot of Sid traps I could go into
that uh the formation of the Coptic
Orthodox Church came out of that uh
controversy in the uh in the uh early
fifth century late 4th Century but um
and the syak Orthodox Church th those
are those are stories for another time
but the these controversies uh
especially in the fifth century when we
get into the 400s um not only on the
monop isite debates between the uh the
the christological nature
uh whether it's divine and human or the
Divine overwhelms the human with um
noorus the these types of
things arise
as everyone always talks about them as
purely theological but I want to push
against that now we're a couple years
away from getting into the intricacies
of these debates but let me just suffice
to say now when you look at the
controversies that take place between
Antioch and Alex Andria be it the
noorian controversies or even the later
versions of the Aryan controversies or
the monopis or diyite debates and the
theological controversies that have to
do with the natures of Christ and then
much later on um uh after all of this uh
it it moves into monothelitism and
things like that but that's well after
uh the world of Antioch at this time in
dealing with these
tensions it is not purely theological in
nature let's just put it this way right
uh there is a
longstanding political rivalry between
these two cities and between their two
theological schools and yes between the
theologians who are in those people like
serial of Alexandria or or people like
um as we just mentioned Theodor of
mestia um uh people like noorus for
instance uh and and also people like
John christom right um John christom was
a uh you can just see how how Central uh
places like Antioch were right because
John christum himself originally from
Antioch was uh a deacon and a reader in
uh in the Church of Antioch and he was
uh brought in to become the patriarch of
Constantinople right uh you know things
that for instance those who were in
Alexandria Egypt did not like and had
all sorts of issues with um and the same
thing happened with noorus right um you
know who was argued to have a much more
extreme version of the antien thought
with regards to the uh the the the
nature of Christ persons um and and how
those Natures work together and um you
know argued that um oh man I don't want
to open the can of worms that is
historian ISM um but I it to say here
whenever you're dealing with these two
cities and the the debates that rage
between them um monopis
iism um in in alexandrian christology or
Diop iism in antien thought um even
historian um or at least historious
coming out of the antien school these
differences do have theological issue
between them and philosophical rigor
back and forth and both of them deal
with uh different approaches to reality
and scripture and Theology and so forth
but do not for a second think of these
things simply as
theological
um tensions they are as political and
ecclesiastically wrapped into political
power as they are
theological um and that goes for the
councils that dealt with him as well and
we are going to spend much time in the
Council of Ephesus and the Council of
Caledon uh 431 and 451 ad respectively
um dealing with these issues because
some of the calls that were made are
probably going to make you squirmish
when you start looking into the details
um they're they're really easy to accept
on their face and then you start looking
into the details and realizing what's
going on behind the scenes is really not
on the up and up like it kind of
presents itself on um this is not some
just pursuit of pure theological Clarity
uh but there's a whole lot of political
uh Intrigue and power that are going on
throughout all of this um so keep that
in mind as we uh as we kind of pull
apart some of that um again noorus uh
this is this is U kind of part for the
course and what I'm just talking about
here he was uh part of the Antioch
tradition uh lived in Antioch uh he
became patriarch of con stantinople uh
again c stantinople not really next to
Antioch all the way up there this is
starting at the beginning of the
development of the pentarchy uh the five
centers of the church um that from the
fifth century uh uh were kind of argued
to be Rome and Alexandria Egypt Antioch
Jerusalem just simply for its you know
Antiquity
and um
Constantinople the idea of the noorian
controversy being born out of the antien
school does a great deal of damage
throughout the uh Church's concept of
what Alexandria and what Antioch are
producing uh Alexandria Maneuvers itself
as the uh the defender of of Orthodox
theology while it it's able to label
Antioch as the uh one who made someone
like
noorus which is uh interesting um and so
like at 4 31 for instance in the Council
of Ephesus noorus is condemned um and
this nestorianism a simplified view of
this that Christ's human and divine
Natures uh were um far too separated out
um is declared heretical uh and it
really brings a lot of damage to the
antia King School um the Council of
caldon um again helps in balancing out
some of that uh because then you know
Alexandria gets kind of full of itself
and so there's there becomes the
affirmation of the diyite position and
the rejection of the monop isite um idea
that there's uh one nature uh in Christ
and you know it it it starts uh
hammering out this idea of um Orthodox
christology and those on the outside and
it does create several schisms very
early on um here in the in the fifth
century and and Beyond uh again things
like the Coptic Church the uh the syak
Orthodox Church the um you know the
Assyrian Church of the East and several
others uh that break off because they're
holding to a certain side of this
thought uh that matches a little bit
more with their own way of thinking uh
their own way of dealing with Theology
and scripture and it makes it very
difficult to uh to wrestle with that
more well Antioch itself oh and by the
way once you get into the sixth Century
uh Theodore of mopsuestia just to add
kind of I suppose uh the nail to the
cofin Theodore of mesa's writings are uh
way after he died uh are condemned uh as
having a a lingering
nestorian influence shall you say that's
the three chapters controversy that's
you know mid mid 6th Century um so
that's way outside our time perview at
this point but that's second Council of
Constantinople quite a ways away but
here as we're looking at it I just
wanted to be able to give all of us a a
place to go back to to remind us of
Antioch the city itself uh not just the
city but the embroiled controversies
because what we're going to start seeing
is Antioch as a city gain more
prominence we're going to see certain
teachers come out of there uh we're
going to interact with them certain uh
writings that come out of there um
references to it and so it's good to
have a bit of an introduction to the
city that is Antioch um uh again the
city itself as as history goes on um is
sacked multiple times from multiple
angles um again so the Persians come in
and take it over that's the assassinate
Invasion by the way um and then the um
the Byzantine emperor Justinian uh
rebuilds part of it but you know Antioch
never really comes back from that uh
once the Muslim invasions of the 7th
Century come through they um they take
over Antioch and it
really uh after the uh rashidan uh
caliphate it pretty much ends antioch's
uh significance as any kind of major
Christian Center in the future and so
with the fall after that of Jerusalem
and of Alexandria Egypt and of Antioch
really the two centers of the church
become Rome and Constantinople and then
but then even in that the Western uh
world has fallen to Rome uh the Western
Roman Empire is since fallen for you
know a few hundred years at this point
and so uh you have political divisions
even there and so um one of the one of
the lasting Fascinations of Antioch even
though after the 7th century all bit
disappears um one of the lasting
influences that it has had is on not
only its uh dealings with with balancing
out christology but also in its uh
habits and biblical interpretations
something that I'm very grateful for is
the antien schools work on the literal
historical uh exegesis of scripture the
idea that we should uh we should value
the literal rendering and the historical
contexts of a certain text when we come
to its meaning we can't just pull it out
and make it mean something that we want
it to mean so that our Traditions are
backed up uh otherwise scripture doesn't
get to play its role that it's required
to play in the church and that is the
thing that corrects us the one that
Norms us and brings us back into
alignment with the revelation of
God all that to be said Antioch is a
fascinating City it deserves our
attention and in the coming uh months uh
we will certainly be referencing it
several times again and again uh I hope
you have a bit more of appreciation for
it this day and uh I will see you next
time Lord's blessings
[Music]
oh
[Applause]
[Music]